the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT open courseware continue
to offer highquality educational
resources for free to make a donation or
to view additional materials from
hundreds of MIT courses visit MIT open
courseware at
ocw.mit.edu okay let me
just tell you first about you know the
list of topics so basically the list of
topics is simple it's
everything
okay
so I mean everything we've seen in class
so far is on the
exam um but let me
just remind you of the main topics that
we've
seen so first of all we learned
about vectors how to use them and do
product
so at this point you should probably
know that the dot product of two
vectors is obtained by summing products
of components and geometrically it's the
length of a Time the length of B time
the cosine of the angle between them
and in particular we can use do
product to measure
angles by solving for cosine Theta in
this
equality and most importantly to
detect whether two vectors are
perpendicular to each
other okay two vectors are perpendicular
when their dot product is
zero okay and any questions about
that
no okay is everyone reasonably happy
with that product by
now
yeah I see a stand silence nobody happy
with that product so
far
okay okay um so if you want to look at
you know on practice 1
a a
good example of a typical problem with
product would be problem one
and let's see we are going to go over
the practice exam when I'm done writing
this list of topics I think probably we
actually will skip this problem because
I think most of you know how to do it
and if not then you should run for help
from me or from your recitation
instructor to figure out you know how to
do it
so the second topic that we saw was
cross
product so when you have two vectors in
space you can just form a cross product
by Computing this
determinant so implicitly we should also
know about determinants
um by that I mean 2 by two and 3x3 okay
don't bothering on larger ones even if
you're interested they won't be on the
test and applications of cross
product so for example finding the
area of a triangle or a parallelogram in
space
so if you have a triangle in
space with sides A and
B then its area is 1 half of the length
of A cross B because the length of A
cross
B well is length a length B sin Theta
which is the same as the area of a
parallelogram formed by these two
vectors
and the other
application of cross product is to find
a vector that's perpendicular to two
given vectors so in particular to find
the vector that's normal to a plane and
then find the equation of a
plane okay so another application is
finding the normal
Vector to a
plane and using that
finding the
equation of a
plane so basically remember to find the
plane ax plus b y + C zal D what you
need is the normal Vector to the
plane and the components of a normal
Vector are exactly the coefficients that
go into this and we've seen an argument
for why that happens to be the
case so to find a normal Vector to a
plane
typically what we'll do is we'll take
two vectors that lie in the plane and we
take their cross product and their cross
product will automatically be
perpendicular to both of
them okay
so we are going to see an example of
that when we look at problem five on
practice 1 a I think we'll try to do
that
one um
so another application well or let me
just mention it as a topic that goes
along with this one
so we've seen also about equations of
lines and how to find
where a line intersects a
plane so just to refresh your memories
the equation of a line well we'll be
looking at parametric equations to know
the parametric equation of a line we
need to know a point on the line and we
need to know a vector that's parallel to
the line
okay and if we know a point on the line
and a vector along the line then we can
express the parametric equations for the
motion of a
point that's moving on the line moving
actually starting at this point at time
zero and moving with velocity V
so to put things in symbolic form you'll
get the position of that point by
starting with a position at time zero
and adding T times the vector v okay so
that gives you X Y and Z in terms of
T and that's how we represent lines
okay so we'll look at problem five in a
bit but um any general questions about
these
topics no I oh do you have a question
yes do we have to know Taylor series uh
that's a good question no not on the
exam okay
[Applause]
okay so Taylor series are something you
should be aware of generally speaking it
will be useful for you in real life at
least if you do you know probably not
when you know not when you go to the
supermarket but if you solve engineering
problems you will need tailor series
okay so it would be good not to forget
them entirely but uh on 1802
exams they probably won't be
there okay
uh let me continue with more topics and
then we can see if you can think of
other topics that should or should not
be on the
exam so third topic would be
matrices linear
systems inverting matrices
so I know that most of you have
calculators that can invert matrices but
still you're expected at this point to
know how to do it by hand uh if you've
looked at the practice test both of them
have a problem that asks you to invert a
matrix or at least do part of that and
uh so it's very likely that tomorrow
there will be a problem like that as
well okay in general when a when a kind
of problem is on both practice tests
it's a good indication that it might be
there also on the actual
exam um unfortunately not with the same
Matrix so you can't learn the answer by
heart okay
so
um another thing that we've
learned about well matrices so I should
say this is going to be problem
three on the test and we're on the
practice test on the ACT test too I
think actually
but and
um anyway so we'll we'll come back to it
later but so a couple of things that you
should remember so if you have a system
of the form ax equals B then there's two
cases if the determinant of a is not
zero then that means you can compute the
inverse Matrix and you can just solve by
taking a inverse *
B and the other case is when the
determinant of
a is zero and then
there's either no
solution or there's infinitely many
solutions and if so in particular if you
know that there's a solution for example
if B is zero there's always an obvious
solution x equal Z then you will
actually have infinitely remaining in we
don't really know how to tell whether
it's no solution or infinitely
many okay questions about
that
yes will we have to know how to rotate
rotate vectors and so on
um not in general
but you might still want to remember how
to rotate a vector in the plane by 90 de
because that's been useful you know when
we've done problems about parametric
equations which is what I'm coming to
next um but so what we've seen about
rotation matrices that was an homework
Part B problem uh you're not supposed to
Remember by heart everything that was in
Part B of the
homework okay um it's a good idea to
have some vague knowledge because it's
useful culture I would say useful
background for later in your lives but
no uh I want ask you by heart to know
what is the formula for a rotation
Matrix okay and then we come to last but
not least the problem of
finding parametric equations
and in particular possibly by
decomposing the position Vector into a
sum of simpler vectors so you've seen
quite an evil example of that on the
last problem set with you know this
picture that maybe by
now you've had some nightmares about
um okay so anyway the one on the exam
will certainly be easier than that okay
but as you've SE seen oops well
whatever I mean you should know
basically how to analyze a motion that's
being described to you and express it in
terms of vectors and then figure out
what the parametric equation will be now
again it won't be as complicated on the
exam as the one on the problem set um
but there's a couple of those on the
practice exams and that gives you an
idea of what real ically expected of
you and now once we have parametric
equations for motion so that means when
we know how to find the position Vector
as a function of a parameter maybe of
time then we've seen also
about velocity and
acceleration which are the vectors
obtained by taking the first and second
derivatives of the position
vector
and so one topic that I will add in
there as well is
somehow how to prove things about
motions by differentiating vectors
identities so one example of that for
example is when we try to look at K plus
law in class last time uh we looked at K
plus second law of planetary motion and
we reduced it to a calculation about the
derivative of the cross product R cross
V so now on the exam you don't need to
know the details of kep law but you need
to be able to manipulate Vector
quantities a bit in the way that we
did and so on practice exam 1 a um you
have actually an orgy of problems on
this topic because you have problems two
four and six are all about parametric
motions uh probably tomorrow there will
not be three distinct problems about
parametric
motions but maybe a couple of
them okay so I think that's basically
the list of topics um anybody spot
something that I forgotten to put on the
exam or questions about something that
should or should not be there uh okay
you go
first yeah
yeah how about parameterizing weird
trigonometric functions I'm not sure
what you mean by
that well so parametric curves um will
be you know you need to know how to
parameterize motions and that involves a
little bit of trigonometric
you know when we've seen these problems
about rotating Wheels say the cylo for
example and so on there's a bit ofine
and and so on um I think not much more
than that you won't need obscure
trigonometric
identities um okay you're
next any proofs on the exam are just
like problems well a problem can ask you
to show things uh it's not going to be a
complicated proof okay there's proofs
they going to be fairly easy if you look
at practice 1 a the last problem does
have a little bit of proof you know 6B
says show that blah blah blah but as you
will see it's you know it's not a
difficult kind of proof okay
so about the same
yes are there equations of 3D shapes
that we should know at this point
so well we should know definitely a lot
about equations of planes and lines and
you should probably know that a sphere
centered at the origin is the set of
points where you know distance to the
center is equal to the to the radius of
the sphere we don't need more at this
point okay as the semester goes on we'll
start seeing cones and things like that
but at this point um planes lines and
you know maybe you need to know about
circles and spheres but nothing beyond
that
uh more
questions uh
yes so if there's a formula that you
have proved on the homework then yes you
can assume it on the test uh maybe you
want to write on your test that you know
this is a Formula you've seen in
homework just so that we know that you
remember it from homework and not from
you know looking over your neighbor's
shoulder or whatever uh but yes it's
okay to use things that you know
generally speaking that being said you
know for example there's a probably
there will be a linear system to solve
it will say on the exam you're supposed
to solve that using matrices not by
elimination okay so there's things like
that you know if the ex if a problem
says you know solve by using Vector
methods or things like that then try to
use you know at least a vector
somewhere but in general you're allowed
to use things that you
know yes
um will we need to go from parametric
equations to XY
equations
well let's say only if it's very easy
okay if I give you a parametric curve
sin T comma sin T then you should be
able to observe that it's on the line
yals
X um not beyond
that okay uh
yes do we have to use
S uh yes um I don't know if you will
have to use it but certainly you should
know about a little bit about the unit
tension Vector so just remember the main
thing to know is that the unit tension
Vector is velocity divided by length by
the
speed I mean there's not much more to it
when you think about it
okay uh
yes ah keas law um well you're allowed
to use it if it helps you if you find a
way to squeeze it in uh you don't have
to know Kepler law in detail you just
have to know how to reproduce the
general steps so if I tell you R cross V
is constant you
might you know expected to know what to
do with
that um I would say you don't so
basically you don't need to know CL law
you need to know the kind of stuff that
we saw when we derived it such as how to
take the derivative of a DOT product or
a cross product that's basically the
answer okay I don't see any questions
anymore so oh you're raising your hand
yes have to the
um how to calculate the distance between
two lines and distance between two
planes well you've seen probably
recently that it's quite painful to do
in general and no I don't think that
will be on the exam by itself okay you
need to know how to compute the distance
between two points that certainly you
need to know and also maybe you know how
to find the component of a vector in a
certain
direction okay and that's about it I
would say I mean you know the more you
know about things the better
but you know things that come up Part B
of the problem sets are interesting
things but they're usually not needed on
the
exams
okay if you have more questions when
you're not raising your hand high enough
for me to see
it okay so let's try to go a bit of
practice exam 1 a uh hopefully everybody
has it if you don't have it hopefully
your neighbor has it if you don't have
it and your neighbor doesn't have it
then please raise your hand I have a
couple of
okay okay
so oh see more people need it over there
well okay I mean if your neighbor has it
then just follow on them for now but
okay I think there's a few people behind
you over
there okay I'll stop handing them out
now if you really need one it's on the
website or it will be here at the end of
class okay
so let's
see
um
well so I think we are going to just
skip problems one and two because they
are pretty straight for forward and I
hope that you know how to do
them
if I don't
know okay let's see how many of you have
no problem with problem
one okay oh how many of you have trouble
with problem
one okay how many of you haven't raised
your
hands okay how many of you have trouble
with problem
two okay so I think well if you have
questions about those maybe you should
just come see me at the end because
that's probably more efficient that way
so I'm going to start right away with
problem three
actually okay so problem three says we
have a matrix given to
us 1 3 2 2 0 -1 1 1 0 and it tells us
determinant of a is 2 and a inverse
equals something but we're missing two
values A and B and we're supposed to
find them okay so that means we need to
do the steps of the algorithm to find
the inverse of
a
so we are told actually the a inverse is
12 of
-1 - 2 5 2 2 - 6 and here there's two
unknown
values so remember to invert a matrix
first we compute the
minus then we flip some signs to get the
co-actors then we transpose and finally
we divide by the
determinant okay so let's try to be
smart about this do we need to compute
all nine minus no we need to compute two
of them right so which miners do we need
to
compute here and
here or here and here yeah that looks
better because remember we're we going
to transpose things so these two guys
will end up here okay so I claim we
should compute these two
Miners and we'll see if that's good
enough you know if you start doing
others and you find that they don't end
up in the right place then just do more
but you don't need to spend your time
all nine of them you know if you're
worried about not doing it right then of
course you can maybe compute one or two
more to just double check your
answers but let's just do those that we
think are needed
so in The Matrix of
minus so the one that goes in the middle
position is obtained by deleting this
row and that column and we are left with
a determinant 3 2 1 0 3 * 0 - 1 * 2
should be-
2 then the one for the lower left corner
we delete the last row and the First
Column we're left with 3 2 0 - 1 3 * -1
is -3- 0 we're still left
with3 okay
uh is that step clear for
everyone
good then we need to go
to co-actors that means we need to
change signs okay so the rule
is we change signs in basically these
four places so that
means we'll be left with POS 2
and3 then we take the
transpose that means well these two so
the First Column will copy into the
first row so this guy we still don't
know but here we'll have two and here
we'll have minus
three and
finally we have to divide
by the determinant of
a and here well we are actually told
that determinant of a is two so we'll
divide by two but there's already one
have here so actually it's done for us
okay so the values that we'll put up
there are going to be two
and-3 okay
now let's see how we use that to solve a
linear
system
so if we have to solve a linear system
axal
B so
then well the Matrix is invertible its
determinant is not zero so we can
certainly write xal a inverse
B so we have to multiply
oh does that 12 1 2 -3 - 1 - 2 5 2 2 - 6
time B is 1 -2
1 well so remember to do a matrix
multiplication you take the rows in here
the columns in here and you do dot
products okay so the first entry will be
1 * 1 + 2 * - 2+ - 3 * 1 that's 1 - 4 -
3 should be
-6 except I still have of course a 1/2
in
front then -1 + 4 + 5 should be
8 2 - 4 - 6 should
be8 so that will simplify to- 3 4 -
4 okay any questions about
that okay so now we come to part C which
is the harder part of this
problem so it says let's take this
Matrix a and let's replace the two in
the upper right corner by some other
number c so that means we'll look at 1 3
c 2 0 - 1 1 1 0
and well let's call that
M and it first asks you to find a value
of C for which this Matrix is not
invertible okay
so m is not
invertible exactly when the determinant
of M is zero so let's compute the
determinant
well we should do one * that smaller
determinant which is 0 minus1
is 1 *
1us 3 * that determinant which is 0 + 1
is
1 and then we have plus C * the lower
left determinant which is 2 * 1 - 0 is
2 okay so that gives us 1 - 2 + 2 c
soorry 1 - 3 is -2 + 2 C that's
0 when c equal
1 okay so for Cals 1 this Matrix is not
invertible for other values it is
invertible okay so it goes on to say
well let's look at this value of C and
let's look at the system MX equal
Z okay
so I'm going to put that value one in
there okay
so now if we look at MX equal
Z well this has either no solution or
infinitely many solutions but here
there's an obvious solution namely xal 0
is a solution okay maybe let me rewrite
it more
geometrically that's x + 3 y + z = 0
2x - Z = 0
and x +
y equals z okay so you see we have an
obvious solution 00 0 but we have more
solutions how do we find more solutions
well XYZ is a solution if it's in all
three of these
planes that's a way to think about it so
probably we're actually in this
situation where in fact we have three
planes that are all passing through the
origin and all parallel to the same line
and so that will be the line of
solutions so to find it actually we can
think of this as follows so the first
observation is that
actually in this situation we don't need
all three equations okay the fact that
the system has infinitely many solutions
means that actually one of the equations
is redundant so if you look about you
know if you look at it for long enough
you see for example if you multiply
three times this equation and you
subtract that one then you will get the
first equation
right 3 * x +
Yus 2x - Z will be x + 3 y + z now we
don't actually need to see that to solve
the problem I'm just showing you that's
what happens when you have a matrix with
determinant zero one of the equations
somehow is you know a duplicate of the
others uh we don't actually need to
figure out how
exactly but so what that means is really
we want to solve let's say start with
two of these
equations so to find a
solution we can observe that the first
equation says actually that
XYZ product with 1
31 equals z and the second equation says
XYZ dot product with 2
01 is z and the third equation
if we really want to keep it says we
should be also having
this now these equations now written
like this they're just saying we want an
XYZ that perpendicular to these
vectors so let's forget this one and
let's just look at these two they're
saying we want a vector that's
perpendicular to these two given vectors
how do we find that we do the cross
product okay
so to find
XYZ perpendicular to 13 1 and two 1 2
01 we
take the cross
product and that will give us something
well let me just give give you the
answer I'm sure you know how to do cross
products by now H I don't have the
answer here so I guess I have to do
it
okay 1 3 1 2 0 1 that should
be3 - 1 - 2 probably positive
3 and
then
-6 okay so that's a solution and any
multiple of that is a solution so if you
like you know neatly simplified answers
you could sayga 1 1 -2 if you like
larger numbers you could multiply that
by a million that's also a
solution
okay any questions about
that yes
Sol that's correct if you pick you know
if you pick these two guys instead you
will get the same solution well up to a
multiple could be that if you do the
cross product of these two guys you
actually get something that's you know a
multipolar actually I think if you do
the cross product of the first and third
one you will get actually minus one one
minus two you know the smaller
one but it doesn't matter I mean it's
really in the same direction this is all
because a plane has actually normal
vectors of all sizes
yes I don't think so because see okay so
an important thing to remember about
cross product is we compute the minus
but then we put a minus sign on the
second component okay so the coefficient
of J in here the second component you do
1 * minus oneus 2 * 1 that's ne3 indeed
but then you actually change that to a
positive
three uh yes admin
sorry
uh do we have
to well we don't have parametric
equations
here oh by so solving by elimination
well if it says that you have to use
Vector methods then you should use
vector methods okay if it says you
should use vectors and matrices then
you're expected to do it that way
yes so it depends what the problem is
asking okay question is is it enough to
find the components of a vector or do we
have to find the equation of a line here
it says find one solution using Vector
operations so we have found one
solution if you wanted to find the line
then it would be all the all the things
that are proportional to this so it
would be maybe minus 3 T 3 tus 6 right
all the multiples of that
Vector uh we do because z00 Z is an
obvious solution here okay yes so maybe
I should okay I I'll write that on the
board uh you had another question so the
reason you
um not quite okay so let me re explain
first how we get all the solutions and
how why I did that cross product I see
that's uh topic
okay
so first of all why did I take that
cross product again so I took that cross
product because I looked at my three
equations and I observed that my three
equations can be reformulated in terms
of these dot products okay saying that
XYZ is actually perpendicular to these
guys and these guys have a normal
vectors to the planes remember to be in
all three planes it needs to be
perpendicular to the normal
vectors
so that's how we got here and now if we
want something that's perpendicular to a
bunch of given vectors well to be
perpendicular to two vectors an easy way
to find one is to take the cross product
and if you take any two of them you will
get something that's the same up to
scaling so now what it means
geometrically is that while we have our
three
planes and they're
all par they all actually contain the
same
line and we know that's actually really
the case because they all pass through
the origin okay they pass through the
origin because the constant terms are
just
zero
so what happens is that the normal
vectors to these
planes are in fact all perpendicular to
that line okay the normal
vectors are actually all say this line
is vertical the normal vectors are all
going to be
horizontal well it's kind of hard to
draw
but and so by taking the cross product
between two of the normal vectors we
found this direction so now to find
actually all the solutions
so what we know so far is that we have
this direction minus 3 3 - 6 that is
going to be parallel to the line of
intersection let me draw it here for
example 3 3 -
6 and so now we have one particular
solution
0 0 0 actually we have found another one
too which is - 3 3 - 6 but anyway so now
the line of
solutions has parametric
equation xal - 3 t y = 3 t z =
-6 or you know any anything proportional
to
that okay so that's how we would find
all the solutions if we wanted
them
okay all
right uh it's almost time so I think I
need to jump ahead to other problems so
let's see problem four I think problem
four you can probably find for
yourselves it's a reasonably
straightforward parametric equations
problem you just have to find you know
the coordinates of that point p and for
that it's very simple trig problem five
find the area of a space triangle sounds
like a cross product find the equation
of a plane also sounds like a cross
product okay and find the intersection
of this plane with a line uh means we
find first the paric equation of a line
and then we plug that into the equation
of plane to get where they
intersect okay does that sound
reasonable okay who desparate about
problem
five okay let me repeat problem
five
so first part we have to find the area
of a triangle and the way to do that is
to just do 1 half of the length of a
cross product between no so if we have
three points p 0 P1 P2
then maybe we can form vectors p 0 P1
and p 0
P2 and if we take the cross product and
take the length of that and divide by
two that will give us the area of the
triangle
okay so
here turns out that this guy is 112 if I
look at the solutions so you will end up
with square root of 6
over
two
the second one is asking you for the
equation of a
plane well containing these three points
well first of all we know that the
normal
Vector to the plane is going to be given
by this cross product again
okay
so that means that the equation of a
plane will be of the form x + y + 2 Z
equals
something okay just the coefficients
here come from the normal
vector and to find what goes on the
right hand side we just plug in any of
the points so if we plug in p 0 which
is so p 0
is 2 1
0 then 2 + 1 seems like it's three and
if you want to double check your answer
you can take P1 and P2 and check that
you also get free it's a good way to
check your
answer
okay and then the third part so we have
a
line parallel to the vector v = 111
through the point
s which is - 1 0 0 that means you can
find its parametric equation okay so X
will be starts at minus one increases at
rate one y starts at zero increases at
rate one Z starts at zero increases at
rate one you plug these into the plane
equation and that will tell you where
they
intersect is that clear
okay okay and now in the last
one minute oh on that side I have one
minute let me just say very
quickly uh oh well do you want to hear
about problem six anyway very quickly
yeah
okay so problem
six you know it's one of these like
vector calculations so it says we have a
position Vector R and it asks you how do
we find
the derivative of r.
R well remember we have the product rule
for taking the derivative okay UV Prime
is U Prime V plus u v Prime also applies
for DOT product so that's
drdt r+ R do drdt and these are both the
same thing so you get two R do drdt but
drdt is V that's a velocity vector
okay hopefully you've seen things like
that now it says show that if R has
constant length then r and v are
perpendicular so all you need to write
basically is we
assume uh length R is
constant that's what it says R has
constant length well how do we get to
say something we probably want to reduce
to that well if R is constant in length
then r. R is also constant
and so that means d by DT of r.
R is zero that's what it means to be
constant and so that means r.
V is zero that means R is perpendicular
to
V
okay that's a proof it's not very see
it's not a scary proof
and then the last question of the exam
says let's continue to assume that R has
constant length and let's try to find r.
a so if there's acceleration then
probably we should bring it in somewhere
maybe by taking a derivative of
something okay so if we know that r. V
equals zero let's take the derivative of
that that's still zero
but now using the product rule well drdt
is V do V plus r do
dvdt is going to be zero so that means
that you're asked about r. a well that's
equal to minus v.
V okay and that's it